SAT Solver - Richard Gale
-------------------------

-- Overview --

I plan to make a program that solves boolean satisfiability instances: given a
boolean formula (an expression made of boolean variables combined with AND, OR,
and NOT operations), determine whether there exist assignments of true/false to
the variables for which the formula evaluates to true.

At the lowest level, I will develop a solver which takes formulas in conjunctive
normal form (CNF)--the conjunction (AND) of disjunctions (OR) of literals
(boolean variables or their negations)--and either outputs a valid configuration
or determines that one does not exist.

At a higher level (motivated by the real-world use cases of SAT solvers), the
program will take in more abstract problems as input (e.g., sudoku, n queens, or
graph coloring). The input will then be translated into CNF and handled using
the solver described above.



-- Milestones --

Easy:

The first milestone will focus only on the CNF solver. In particular, this will
just be a naive backtracking solver using recursion, similar in approach to a
standard sudoku solver. It will be based on the Davis–Putnam–Logemann–Loveland
(DPLL) algorithm. It should have hard-coded encoders for sudoku and n queens.


Medium:

The second milestone will largely involve rewriting the implementation to use
mutable state, rather than a pure approach.

Additionally, rather than hard coding the CNF formula for each type of problem
(sudoku or n queens, for example), I will make a small collection of primitives
that abstract away the technical level (conjunctions/disjunctions/literals, and
keeping track of variable IDs) into more natural constraints (e.g., a constraint
which asserts that exactly one variable in a group is true).


Challenge:

One natural extension would be to use a modern SAT-solving algorithm:
conflict-driven clause learning (CDCL). This approach modifies the DPLL
algorithm to analyze why conflicts occur when the solver reaches a dead end and
learns a new clause that prevents the same mistake, rather than just
backtracking a level.

On the input side, I could support many different problem input formats and
develop translators from these problems to CNF. For example, I could support
arbitrary propositional logic formulas and convert them to conjunctive normal
form.

I could also prove unsatisfiability: when the input formula is satisfiable, it
can be easily verified that the solution the program provides is correct by
plugging it into the formula; but when the program determines no such solution
exists, we must trust that the solver didn't miss any solutions. So, I could
output the steps the solver took to reach its final answer (output which clauses
were combined, which new clauses were learned, and what the final contradiction
is) to prove that the problem is indeed unsatisfiable.



-- Inspiration --

I am unsure from the instructions whether we should document our inspiration for
our project ideas, so I have included this section just in case.

I am generally interested in learning about NP-Complete and NP-Hard problems and
I am currently taking a mathematical logic course, so SAT was a natural choice
that combines the two.

As for why I chose this problem for a functional programming course, I saw
mutable state as one of the advanced topics listed on the assignment page, and
figured it would be a fun challenge to implement this recursive algorithm with
mutable state, as a pure approach would not scale well. Unfortunately, the
chapter on mutable state in Professor Kurtz's book is currently unwritten, but
the Haskell documentation seems fairly extensive.



-- Resources --

Although I was vaguely familiar with the Boolean satisfiability problem, I
consulted several resources in coming up with this proposal (and expect to rely
on many more throughout the project, as I will be implementing known
algorithms). I have kept track of all sources in the resources.txt file.

I anticipate that the project will require mutable state for the optimized
solver, parser combinators for the CNF formulas (and for higher-level input,
depending on the direction of the project), and monad transformers for layered
error handling.

