SAT Solver - Richard Gale
-------------------------

-- Overview --

This project is a boolean satisfiability solver. Given a boolean formula (which
is an expression made of boolean variables combined with AND, OR, and NOT
operations), it determines whether there exist assignments of true/false to the
variables for which the formula evaluates to true.

The SAT problem is significant because it was the first problem proven to be
NP-complete, and other problems in NP are often reduced to it since, despite
being computationally hard, it can often be solved quite efficiently in
practice.

At the lowest level, this solver operates on formulas in conjunctive normal
form: the conjunction (logical AND) of disjunctions (logical ORs) of literals
(boolean variables or their negations). It either outputs a satisfying
assignment or determines that none exists.

At a higher level, the program accepts Sudoku puzzles as input, translates them
into CNF, solves them, and translates the solution back into a solved grid. The
solver also reads DIMACS CNF files, a standard format for SAT problems. This
also turned out to be convenient for finding more complicated test cases online,
rather than having to create another program just to produce them (I cited these
additional tests and all other resources in the resources.txt file).

The project includes two solver implementations: a pure functional solver, which
was the original solver I wrote, and a mutable-state solver using the ST monad,
which was an optimization. Both implement the DPLL algorithm. I also added a
verification module to check the correctness of outputted solutions by
plugging the assignment into the original formula.


-- Milestones Completed --

Easy: The pure DPLL solver, DIMACS parser, Sudoku parser, hardcoded Sudoku
encoding and decoding, and pretty-printing for assignments and Sudoku grids. I
had also considered an n queens encoder/decoder (it is another popular
NP-complete problem), but the feedback I received on my proposal told me the
sudoku solver would be sufficient.

Medium: The mutable state solver using the ST monad, with the formula kept
immutable and clauses evaluated by lookup rather than copying. The CLI supports
switching between the pure and mutable solvers using flags. A verification
module checks that solutions are correct.

The constraint DSL described in the proposal was not implemented, and so the
Sudoku encoder is still hardcoded. I wanted to implement this or some other
challenge goal, but the mutable state ended up taking longer than anticipated to
implement.


-- Project Organization --

The project is a Cabal package with a library in src/ and an executable in app/:

src/Types.hs:
Contains core data types: Variable, Literal, Clause, Formula, Assignment,
Problem, SudokuGrid, and the Solve type alias used to abstract over solver
implementations.

src/Solver/Pure.hs:
Pure functional version of the DPLL solver which copies and filters the formula
on each assignment. It uses the Alternative instance on Maybe for backtracking.

src/Solver/Mutable.hs:
Mutable-state DPLL solver using the ST monad. It maintains a mutable assignment
array and a backtracking trail, evaluating clauses by looking up variable values
rather than filtering the formula. The key functions are evalClause, which
determines a clause's status and detects unit clauses; scanFormula, which finds
the first unit clause or conflict; and chooseVariable, which picks an unassigned
variable from an unsatisfied clause.

src/Parser/Common.hs:
Shared parser functions and types; it defines the Parser type, Megaparsec with
Void and String, and a parsePretty wrapper that strips comment lines and blank
lines before parsing.

src/Parser/DIMACS.hs:
Parses the DIMACS CNF format. It handles the problem line, clause lines
terminated by 0, comment lines (which start with c), and the trailing %
character found in SATLIB benchmark files (I'm not sure why they have this, as
it doesn't seem to follow the standard DIMACS format).

src/Parser/Sudoku.hs:
Parses a simple Sudoku text format of 9 lines of 9 characters, with digits 1-9
and dots for empty cells; comment lines are marked by #.

src/Encoder/Sudoku.hs:
Encodes a Sudoku grid as a CNF formula, using 729 variables (one per row/column/
digit combination). It also provides a decoder that maps a satisfying assignment
back to a solved grid.

src/Printing.hs:
Pretty prints outputted solutions to make the variable assignments and Sudoku
grids readable.

src/Verify.hs:
Checks that every clause in the formula has at least one true literal under the
given assignment.

app/Main.hs:
Entry point, which parses flags --pure, --mutable, and --verify, and handles
input based on its file extension: .cnf for DIMACS, .sdk for Sudoku.

compare.py:
Benchmark script that runs both solvers on some of the DIMACS files from SATLIB,
timing both and verifying their correctness.

test/:
Contains some DIMACS files I wrote (one satisfiable and one unsatisfiable
problem), a Sudoku puzzle, and a set of 1000 random SAT instances from SATLIB,
for longer testing to see differences in the speed of the pure and mutable
solvers.


-- How to Use --

Run: cabal run sat-solver -- [--pure | --mutable] [--verify] <filename>
The default solver is --mutable; the --verify flag checks the solution after
solving.

Examples:
cabal run sat-solver -- --pure --verify test/uf100-430/uf100-01.cnf
cabal run sat-solver -- test/sudoku.sdk
  
For benchmarking, run: python3 compare.py <filename> <integer>


-- Advanced Topics Used --

Mutable state (ST monad): The mutable solver uses STArray for the variable
assignment and STRef for the backtracking trail, running entirely within the ST
monad. The external interface remains pure: solve returns Maybe Assignment using
runST.

Parser combinators (Megaparsec): Used for both the DIMACS parser and the Sudoku
parser, with a shared comment-stripping layer. This was probably overkill, but I
wanted to get some practice with Megaparsec.


-- Resources --

All resources consulted during the project are listed in resources.txt.
